SQL Functions Notes:

1. Overview

Structured Query Language (SQL) is the standard language used to interact with relational database management systems (RDBMS). It allows engineers to create database structures, store data, retrieve information, and manage access to data. SQL has been widely used since the 1970s and remains the primary language for managing structured data in relational databases.

For data engineers, SQL is a fundamental skill because most organizations store critical business data in relational databases such as PostgreSQL, MySQL, SQL Server, and Oracle.

This project repository demonstrates foundational SQL knowledge through practical examples including table creation, data insertion, and querying operations.

2. What is a Database?

A database is an organized collection of structured data designed for efficient storage, retrieval, and manipulation. Databases allow applications and organizations to manage large amounts of information reliably and consistently.

Databases are used across industries including:

Finance and banking systems

E-commerce platforms

Healthcare records

Customer relationship management (CRM)

Logistics and supply chain systems

3. Relational Databases

Relational databases organize data into tables consisting of rows and columns.

Each table represents an entity such as customers, orders, or products.

Example structure:

customer_id	name	country
1	Alice	South Africa
2	John	USA

Key characteristics of relational databases:

Data is stored in tables

Tables can be linked using relationships

Each row represents a record

Each column represents a data attribute

Common relational database systems include:

PostgreSQL

MySQL

Microsoft SQL Server

Oracle Database

4. SQL Command Categories

SQL statements are commonly grouped into several functional categories depending on the operation performed.

4.1 Data Definition Language (DDL)

DDL commands define and modify the structure of database objects.

Common commands:

CREATE
ALTER
DROP
TRUNCATE

Example:

CREATE TABLE customers (
customer_id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
name VARCHAR(100),
country VARCHAR(50)
);
4.2 Data Manipulation Language (DML)

DML commands manipulate the data stored inside database tables.

Common commands:

SELECT
INSERT
UPDATE
DELETE

Example:

INSERT INTO customers (customer_id, name, country)
VALUES (1, 'Alice', 'South Africa');
4.3 Data Control Language (DCL)

DCL commands manage database permissions and access control.

Common commands:

GRANT
REVOKE

These commands are typically used by database administrators to control who can access or modify database objects.

4.4 Transaction Control Language (TCL)

TCL commands manage transactions to ensure data consistency.

Common commands:

COMMIT
ROLLBACK
SAVEPOINT

Transactions ensure that multiple operations are executed safely and maintain database integrity.

5. Basic SQL Query Structure

The most common SQL operation is retrieving data using the SELECT statement.

Basic syntax:

SELECT column_name
FROM table_name
WHERE condition
ORDER BY column_name;

Example query:

SELECT name, country
FROM customers
WHERE country = 'South Africa';

The SELECT statement returns rows from one or more database tables and is the most frequently used SQL operation for data retrieval and analysis.

6. Importance of SQL for Data Engineering

SQL is essential for data engineers because it is used throughout the data lifecycle.

Typical responsibilities include:

Extracting data from operational databases

Transforming raw data for analytics

Building data pipelines

Managing data warehouse tables

Optimizing database queries

Ensuring data integrity and consistency

SQL enables engineers to efficiently handle structured data and build scalable data infrastructure.

7. Practical Learning Objectives of This Repository

This repository demonstrates foundational SQL concepts including:

Creating relational tables

Defining primary keys

Inserting sample data

Querying datasets

Understanding relational structures

Practicing SQL syntax and query logic

The goal of this project is to build practical SQL skills applicable to real-world data engineering workflows.

8. Conclusion

SQL remains one of the most important technologies in the modern data ecosystem. Mastering SQL provides the foundation for careers in data engineering, analytics, and database administration.

Through hands-on projects and structured learning, this repository documents the development of core SQL skills necessary for building and managing data systems.


