Data Manipulation in SQL


1. Overview

Data Manipulation Language (DML) refers to the set of SQL commands used to retrieve, insert, modify, and delete data stored in database tables. These commands allow users and applications to interact with the data within a relational database.

In data engineering workflows, DML operations are used to manage transactional datasets, update records, and prepare data for analytical processing.

The most common DML commands include:

SELECT

INSERT

UPDATE

DELETE

These commands form the foundation of most database interactions.

2. SELECT Statement

The SELECT statement is used to retrieve data from one or more tables in a database.

Basic syntax:

SELECT column_name
FROM table_name;

Example:

SELECT product_name, price
FROM products;

This query retrieves the product_name and price columns from the products table.

3. Filtering Data with WHERE

The WHERE clause allows queries to return only rows that meet specific conditions.

Example:

SELECT *
FROM orders
WHERE amount > 500;

This query returns orders where the total amount exceeds 500.

Filtering data is a critical operation for analytics queries and reporting.

4. INSERT Statement

The INSERT statement is used to add new rows of data into a table.

Basic syntax:

INSERT INTO table_name (column1, column2)
VALUES (value1, value2);

Example:

INSERT INTO products (product_id, product_name, price)
VALUES (6, 'External Hard Drive', 1200);

Multiple rows can also be inserted in a single statement.

Example:

INSERT INTO products (product_id, product_name, price)
VALUES
(7, 'Laptop Stand', 350),
(8, 'USB Hub', 250);

5. UPDATE Statement

The UPDATE statement modifies existing records within a table.

Basic syntax:

UPDATE table_name
SET column_name = value
WHERE condition;

Example:

UPDATE products
SET price = 1400
WHERE product_id = 6;

This query updates the price of a product with ID 6.

Using the WHERE clause is important to prevent unintended updates to all rows.

6. DELETE Statement

The DELETE statement removes rows from a table.

Basic syntax:

DELETE FROM table_name
WHERE condition;

Example:

DELETE FROM products
WHERE product_id = 8;

This query deletes the product with ID 8 from the table.

If the WHERE clause is omitted, all rows in the table will be removed.

7. Importance of Data Manipulation in Data Engineering

Data manipulation plays a central role in data engineering because raw data often needs to be modified, cleaned, or filtered before being used in analytics systems.

Common real-world use cases include:

Inserting new transactional data

Updating incorrect or outdated records

Removing invalid data entries

Extracting filtered datasets for analysis

Preparing data for transformation pipelines

These operations are essential when building reliable data workflows.

8. Best Practices for Data Manipulation

When performing DML operations, several best practices should be followed:

Always use WHERE clauses carefully to avoid unintended updates or deletions.

Validate data before inserting records.

Use transactions when performing multiple related operations.

Maintain consistent data formats across tables.

Test queries on sample datasets before running them on production databases.

Following these practices helps ensure data integrity and reliability.

9. Practical Learning Objectives

This section of the repository focuses on developing hands-on experience with core data manipulation operations including:

Retrieving structured datasets using SELECT

Filtering records using WHERE

Inserting new rows using INSERT

Updating existing records using UPDATE

Removing rows using DELETE

These operations represent the foundational SQL skills required for data engineering tasks.

10. Conclusion

Data Manipulation Language (DML) commands are essential tools for interacting with relational databases. They allow engineers to manage data effectively and support the processing of structured information used by applications, analytics systems, and data pipelines.

Mastering these commands provides the foundational skills needed to build and maintain scalable data systems.